Clarify synonyms docs (#110822)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/analysis/tokenfilters/synonym-graph-tokenfilter.asciidoc

Author: Once agreed, we can include the same doc changes in the synonym token filter.

Reviewer: If we want to stay consistent in our language when referring to "equivalent synonyms" or "explicit synonyms", there's a reference to "explicit mappings" in `synonyms-format.asciidoc` that we should change.

<<indices-reload-analyzers,reloading>> search analyzers to pick up
changes to synonym files. Only to be used for search analyzers.
* `expand` (defaults to `true`).

> Expand definitions for equivalent synonyms mappings.

Reviewer: You refer to individual synonym definitions as "synonym rules" elsewhere in the doc, which I think makes sense here as well.

```suggestion
Expand definitions for equivalent synonym rules.
```

See <<synonym-graph-tokenizer-expand-equivalent-synonyms,expand equivalent synonyms>>.
* `lenient` (defaults to `false`).
If `true` ignores errors while parsing the synonym configuration.
It is important to note that only those synonym rules which cannot get parsed are ignored.

> See <<synonym-graph-tokenizer-stop-token-filter,synoyms and stop token filters>> for an example of `lenient` behaviour for invalid synonym rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See <<synonym-graph-tokenizer-stop-token-filter,synonyms and stop token filters>> for an example of `lenient` behaviour for invalid synonym rules.
```

[discrete]
[[synonym-graph-tokenizer-expand-equivalent-synonyms]]
===== `expand` equivalent synonyms

The `expand` parameter controls whether to expand equivalent synonyms mappings.
Consider a synonym defined like:

`foo, bar, baz`

> Using `expand: true` would get the synonym expanded into:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `expand: true`, the synonym would be expanded into:
```

```
foo => bar
foo => baz
bar => foo
bar => baz
baz => foo
baz => bar

> ```

Reviewer: This representation misses that the "foo" representation of the synonym would also remain. I also think that this representation makes it unclear what the actual token output would be when analysis is performed. Maybe we use the analyze API output format (or something similar to that) to show how a token "foo" would be analyzed in this case?

Reviewer: Just tried with this test analyzer:

```json
PUT test-index
{
    "settings": {
        "number_of_shards": 1,
        "number_of_replicas": 0,
        "analysis": {
            "analyzer": {
                "synonym_analyzer": {
                    "tokenizer": "whitespace",
                    "filter": [
                        "synonym_filter"
                    ]
                }
            },
            "filter": {
                "synonym_filter": {
                  "type": "synonym_graph",
                  "synonyms": [
                    "foo, bar, baz"
                  ]
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Running through the `_analyze` API:

```json
GET test-index/_analyze
{
  "analyzer": "synonym_analyzer",
  "text": "foo"
}

{
    "tokens": [
        {
            "token": "bar",
            "start_offset": 0,
            "end_offset": 3,
            "type": "SYNONYM",
            "position": 0
        },
        {
            "token": "baz",
            "start_offset": 0,
            "end_offset": 3,
            "type": "SYNONYM",
            "position": 0
        },
        {
            "token": "foo",
            "start_offset": 0,
            "end_offset": 3,
            "type": "word",
            "position": 0
        }
    ]
}
```

My point is that the `foo` token is retained, which is not accurately represented by the explicit synonyms in this code block. It's confusing because you're reusing the `=>` delimiter, which is used earlier in this doc to define an explicit synonym. As the reader, I assume you are defining a set of explicit synonyms. Was that your intent?

Reviewer: To be clear, I think it's fine to use the explicit synonym format (with `=>`), but we should be sure that the explicit synonyms accurately represent the synonym expansion behavior

Author: I see - you're right, let's add the explicit mappings for the identity expansions 👍

> When `expand` is set to `false`, the mappings are not expanded and only the first word is considered as the source word. The synonym would be equivalent to:

Reviewer: Let's try to avoid overloading the term "mapping"

```suggestion
When `expand` is set to `false`, the synonyms are not expanded and the first synonym is treated as the canonical representation. The synonym would be equivalent to:
```

<<indices-reload-analyzers,reloading>> search analyzers to pick up
changes to synonym files. Only to be used for search analyzers.
* `expand` (defaults to `true`).

> Expand definitions for equivalent synonym rules.

Reviewer 2: `Expand` -> `Expands`?

See <<synonym-graph-tokenizer-expand-equivalent-synonyms,expand equivalent synonyms>>.
* `lenient` (defaults to `false`).
If `true` ignores errors while parsing the synonym configuration.

> It is important to note that only those synonym rules which cannot get parsed are ignored.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that only synonym rules which _cannot be parsed_ are ignored.
```

nit:brevity + emphasis

See <<synonym-graph-tokenizer-stop-token-filter,synonyms and stop token filters>> for an example of `lenient` behaviour for invalid synonym rules.

[discrete]
[[synonym-graph-tokenizer-expand-equivalent-synonyms]]
===== `expand` equivalent synonym rules

> The `expand` parameter controls whether to expand equivalent synonym rules.

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't hurt to add a simple natural language explanation of what "expand" means before the example. 

Something like:

"`expand` creates bidirectional mappings between all terms in a synonym definition, treating each term as both a source and a target."

{es} will also use the token filters preceding the synonym filter in a tokenizer chain to parse the entries in a synonym file or synonym set.
In the above example, the synonyms graph token filter is placed after a stemmer. The stemmer will also be applied to the synonym entries.

Because entries in the synonym map cannot have stacked positions, some token filters may cause issues here.
Token filters that produce multiple versions of a token may choose which version of the token to emit when parsing synonyms.
For example, `asciifolding` will only produce the folded version of the token.
Others, like `multiplexer`, `word_delimiter_graph` or `ngram` will throw an error.

If you need to build analyzers that include both multi-token filters and synonym filters, consider using the <<analysis-multiplexer-tokenfilter,multiplexer>> filter, with the multi-token filters in one branch and the synonym filter in the other.

[discrete]
[[synonym-graph-tokenizer-stop-token-filter]]

> ===== Synonyms and `stop` token filter

Reviewer: This is pluralized in earlier references and I think the plural form makes more sense grammatically

```suggestion
===== Synonyms and `stop` token filters
```

> Synonyms and <<analysis-stop-tokenfilter,stop token filter>> interact with each other in the following ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Synonyms and <<analysis-stop-tokenfilter,stop token filters>> interact with each other in the following ways:
```

[discrete]
====== Stop token filter *before* synonym token filter

Stop words will be removed from the synonym rule definition.
This can can cause errors on the synonym rule.

> WARNING: An invalid synonym rule will cause an error applying your analyzer changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WARNING: An invalid synonym rule will cause an error when applying your analyzer changes.
```

For reloadable analyzers, the analyzer will not be reloaded and the changes will not be applied.
You must correct the error in the synonym rules and reload the analyzer, as an index that contains an invalid synonym rule won't be able to be reopened.

> This means that the index will be inoperable when a node that contains the index is started, or the index is opened from a closed state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that the index will be inoperable when a node that contains the index is (re)started, or the index is opened from a closed state.
```

Reviewer: Yes, technically, but the most common way for the index to be opened from a closed state is for the node to be restarted. So maybe good to call that case out more specifically?

Author: I'd say it's not needed - lets leave that to the docs team to decide 👍

Reviewer 3: You could add use bullet points to spell out the 3 cases:

```asciidoc
[WARNING]
====
Invalid synonym rules can cause errors when applying analyzer changes.
For reloadable analyzers, this prevents reloading and applying changes.
You must first correct errors in the synonym rules and reload the analyzer.

An index with invalid synonym rules cannot be reopened, making it inoperable when:

* A node containing the index starts
* The index is opened from a closed state
* A node restart occurs (which reopens closed indices)
====
```

But I'll let you folks decide if that's overkill, my only comment would be that if we can meaningfully reduce cognitive load when reading the warning message, then maybe Carlos' original version is OK. I also did a little copyediting to make the original verbiage more concise, feel free to use zero or more of these rephrasings :)

> For *explicit mappings* like `foo, bar => baz` with a stop filter that removes `bar`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For *explicit synonyms* like `foo, bar => baz` with a stop filter that removes `bar`:
```

- If `lenient` is set to `false`, an error will be raised as `bar` would be removed from the left hand side of the synonym rule.
- If `lenient` is set to `true`, the mapping `foo => baz` will be added and `bar => baz` will be ignored.

If the stop filter removed `baz` instead:

- If `lenient` is set to `false`, an error will be raised as `baz` would be removed from the right hand side of the synonym rule.
- If `lenient` is set to `true`, the mapping will have no effect as the target word is removed.

> For *equivalent mappings* like `foo, bar, baz` with a stop filter that removes `bar`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For *equivalent synonyms* like `foo, bar, baz` with a stop filter that removes `bar`:
```

- If `lenient` is set to `false`, an error will be raised as `bar` would be removed from the synonym rule.

> - If `lenient` is set to `true`, the mappings added would be equivalent to `foo => baz` and `baz => foo`, which do not contain the removed word.

Reviewer: Not quite true as this misses that "foo" would be retained

[discrete]
====== Stop token filter *after* synonym token filter

The stop filter will remove the terms from the resulting synonym expansion.

> For example, a synonym like `foo => baz` and a stop filter that removes `baz` will get no matches for `foo` or `bar`, as both would get expanded to `baz` which is removed by the stop filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a synonym like `foo, bar => baz` and a stop filter that removes `baz` will get no matches for `foo` or `bar`, as both would get expanded to `baz` which is removed by the stop filter.
```

In the above example, the synonyms graph token filter is placed after a stemmer. The stemmer will also be applied to the synonym entries.

Because entries in the synonym map cannot have stacked positions, some token filters may cause issues here.
Token filters that produce multiple versions of a token may choose which version of the token to emit when parsing synonyms.
For example, `asciifolding` will only produce the folded version of the token.
Others, like `multiplexer`, `word_delimiter_graph` or `ngram` will throw an error.

If you need to build analyzers that include both multi-token filters and synonym filters, consider using the <<analysis-multiplexer-tokenfilter,multiplexer>> filter, with the multi-token filters in one branch and the synonym filter in the other.

[discrete]
[[synonym-graph-tokenizer-stop-token-filter]]
===== Synonyms and `stop` token filters

Synonyms and <<analysis-stop-tokenfilter,stop token filters>> interact with each other in the following ways:

[discrete]
====== Stop token filter *before* synonym token filter

Stop words will be removed from the synonym rule definition.
This can can cause errors on the synonym rule.

> WARNING: An invalid synonym rule will cause an error when applying your analyzer changes.

Reviewer 2: "will cause" => "can cause"?

When `"lenient": true`, no errors will be raised.

Author: Makes sense 👍

For reloadable analyzers, the analyzer will not be reloaded and the changes will not be applied.

> You must correct the error in the synonym rules and reload the analyzer, as an index that contains an invalid synonym rule won't be able to be reopened.

Author: 👍

This means that the index will be inoperable when a node that contains the index is started, or the index is opened from a closed state.

For *explicit synonyms* like `foo, bar => baz` with a stop filter that removes `bar`:

- If `lenient` is set to `false`, an error will be raised as `bar` would be removed from the left hand side of the synonym rule.
- If `lenient` is set to `true`, the mapping `foo => baz` will be added and `bar => baz` will be ignored.

If the stop filter removed `baz` instead:

- If `lenient` is set to `false`, an error will be raised as `baz` would be removed from the right hand side of the synonym rule.
- If `lenient` is set to `true`, the synonym will have no effect as the target word is removed.

> For *equivalent synonyms* like `foo, bar, baz` with a stop filter that removes `bar`:

Reviewer 2: should we also mention when default `expand=true`, as this example is correct only when `expand=true`

Author: Good call!

- If `lenient` is set to `false`, an error will be raised as `baz` would be removed from the right hand side of the synonym rule.
- If `lenient` is set to `true`, the mapping will have no effect as the target word is removed.

For *equivalent synonyms* like `foo, bar, baz` with a stop filter that removes `bar`:

- If `lenient` is set to `false`, an error will be raised as `bar` would be removed from the synonym rule.

> - If `lenient` is set to `true`, the mappings added would be equivalent to `foo => foo` and `baz => foo`, which do not contain the removed word.

Reviewer: This updated language misses expanding `foo` to `baz` and and that the `baz` token is retained. Maybe we use this list of explicit synonyms to be complete?

```
foo => foo
foo => baz
baz => foo
baz => baz
```

Author: Makes sense, thanks!
